Initiative for Rust codegen (#20)
trifectatechfoundation/trifectatech-website: content/initiatives/codegen.md

+++
title = "Making Rust faster than C"
slug = "codegen"
template = "initiatives/initiative.html"

[extra]
funders = [
    "tweedegolf"
]

blogposts = [
]
+++

### Making Rust faster than C

> Rust, being a systems language, should be best in class for performance-critical software. While the performance difference with C is small, it currenly blocks Rust alternatives from being adopted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rust, being a systems language, should be best in class for performance-critical software. While the performance difference with C is small, it currently blocks Rust implementations from being adopted.
```

Reviewer: e.g. `Zig` is een "rust alternative". misschien nog wat verder sleutelen sws want het loopt nog niet superlekker.

Reviewer: maybe swap the two sentences here? i.e. lead with "rust's (lack of) performance limits adoption in the places where it matters"

Our mission is to make critical infrastructure software safer. For that to happen in all relevant areas, performance considerations must to be removed as a blocking counter-argument.

This initiative exists to contribute to change; to changing Rust's performance story with the ultimate goal of making it faster than C.

### What we've done

Our work on [zlib-rs](/initiatives/datacompression) led us on the path to improve the performance of state machines. Complex state machines are niche, but foundational to many programs, such as parsers, interpreters and networking protocols.

Folkert de Vries wrote an [RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3720) to improve code generation for state machines and bjorn3 implemented a [proof of concept in the Rust compiler](https://github.com/trifectatechfoundation/rust/tree/labeled-match).

> The proof is in the eating: zlib-rs build using the PoC is **5% faster**.

Reviewer: it's more than that in the relevant cases, ~14% to 15% for the small chunk sizes https://gist.github.com/folkertdev/977183fb706b7693863bd7f358578292

Reviewer: it's just that for larger chunk sizes the difference is much smaller, because we enter a tight inner loop quickly

> While we haven't tested other projects, we expect improved codegen is possible for all parsers, interpreters and networking protocols (etc) that make significant use of (TODO: specify type) state machines; in the range of (TODO: realistic range?) 0.5% to 5%.

Reviewer: So, this really depends on the the details of the RFC: as it stands, in most of these cases we just don't know the next state, and it's unclear that we can do much. There are some ideas but I don't really want to commit to much.

> We want to acknowledge the work done in the Zig ecosystem (todo: link) that inspired our proposal. We'd also like to extend gratitude to [Tweede golf](https://tweedegolf.nl) to support the initial effort. 

Reviewer: zig link https://github.com/ziglang/zig/pull/21257

### Making Rust faster than C

Rust, being a systems language, should be best in class for performance-critical software. 

> While the performance difference with C is small, it currently blocks Rust implementations from being adopted. No one will enter a challenging migration to end up with a 1% performance drop or with +2% battery drain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the performance difference with C is small, it currently blocks Rust implementations from being widely adopted. Why go through challenging migration only to end up with a 1% performance drop or with +2% additional battery drain.
```

> Our mission is to make critical infrastructure software safer. Performance considerations must be removed as a blocking counter-argument for that to happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our mission is to make critical infrastructure software safer. Performance considerations must be removed as a blocking counter-argument for adoption in performance-sensitive projects, where the impact is highest.
```

This initiative exists to contribute to change, to change Rust's performance story with the ultimate goal of making it faster than C.

### What we've done

> Our work on [zlib-rs](/initiatives/data-compression/) led us on the path to improving the performance of state machines. Complex state machines are niche but foundational to many programs, such as parsers, interpreters, and networking protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our work on [zlib-rs](/initiatives/data-compression/) put us on the path to improving the performance of state machines. Complex state machines are niche but foundational to many programs, such as parsers, interpreters, and networking protocols.
```
